MSC2376: Disable URL Previews (#2376)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2376-no-url-previews.md

# MSC 2376: Disable URL Previews
Currently URLs posted in chat give a URL preview. Sometimes, for example with bots, this can be

> unwanted, as the user is already basically aware what the link the bot is posting is following to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unwanted. For instance if a bot is posting a message with a lot of links, or the content
of the link is already obvious from the message itself.
```

## Proposal

> This proposal is about adding a new attribute to the `formatted_body` of messages with type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal adds a new attribute to the `formatted_body` key of messages with type
```

`m.room.member` and msgtype `m.text`.

> It adds a new attribute, `data-mx-nopreview` to the `<a>` tag. If this attribute is present the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It adds a new attribute, `data-mx-nopreview` to the `<a>` HTML tag. If this attribute is present, the
```

> client is expected **not** to display a URL preview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client SHOULD NOT display a URL preview.
```

### Example
```json
{
	"msgtype": "m.text",
	"format": "org.matrix.custom.html",

> 	"body": "Hey, look at this awesome MSC!",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	"body": "Hey, look at what I did! MSC2376: Disable URL Previews",
```

> 	"formatted_body": "Hey, look at <a data-mx-nopreview src=\"https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2379\">this</a> awesome MSC!"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	"formatted_body": "Hey, look at what I did! <a data-mx-nopreview src=\"https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2379\">MSC2376: Disable URL Previews</a>"
```

In this case, what the URL preview would show us is already close to what's in this message.

}
```

## Potential issues

> HTML tags are usually meant to be for formatting. Disabling URL previews isn't strictly formatting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTML tags are usually meant for formatting. Disabling URL previews isn't strictly formatting.
```

However, as the client will already have parsed the tag in order to generate a URL preview the place
seems appropriate.

## Alternatives
A flag could be set for the entire message to disable URL previews, however that doesn't allow for
having within a message one URL with preview and one without.

> 

Reviewer 2: Another alternative is a key with an array of URLs to generate thumbnails for, mixin style

```
{
    "body": "somelink, somelink2, somelink3",
    "msgtype": "m.text",
    "url_previews": ["somelink, "somelink3"]
  }
```

Of course this lets someone specify a different link than what the link actually was. Leading to even greater rickrolling potential!

Reviewer: And wouldn't be backwards compatible with existing URL previewing behaviour.

Reviewer: Unless that was a `ignore_url_previews` field :)

Reviewer: But you may want to ignore the URL preview on a link in one part of a message, and not ignore that same link in another part of the message.

...for some reason.

Reviewer 2: Old clients would ignore url_previews and preview everything,

New clients would only render previews for things in the array.

Seems backwards compatible to me?

Reviewer 2: > But you may want to ignore the URL preview on a link in one part of a message, and not ignore that same link in another part of the message.
> 
> ...for some reason.

I don't think the same link in the same message _should_ be rendered multiple times

the url previews come appeneded to the message _after_ all the links after all.

Author: > the url previews come appeneded to the message after all the links after all.

what if the rickroll only appears the second time you hit the website!

Reviewer: I wasn't suggesting showing multiple URL previews for the same link in the same message.

But now that I think about it, it doesn't really matter if the URL is at the beginning of the message, or at the end. It'll show up in the list of URL previews anyways, and the order might not matter.

So I'm fine with this approach as well, especially as it means clients don't need to do regex to figure out which URLs to preview.

Reviewer 2: hmm I guess the ordering is a point to consider here.

if a client deems it very important they can customize the url_previews list with the intended order.

Maybe add a note that clients should render them in the order of the array to the competing MSC?

# MSC 2376: Disable URL Previews
Currently URLs posted in chat give a URL preview. Sometimes, for example with bots, this can be
unwanted. For instance if a bot is posting a message with a lot of links, or the content of the link
is already obvious from the message itself.

## Proposal
This proposal adds a new attribute to the `formatted_body` key of messages with type

> `m.room.member` and msgtype `m.text`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`m.room.message` and msgtype `m.text`.
```

It adds a new attribute, `data-mx-nopreview` to the `<a>` HTML tag. If this attribute is present the
client SHOULD NOT display a URL preview.

### Example
```json
{
	"msgtype": "m.text",
	"format": "org.matrix.custom.html",
	"body": "Hey, look at what I did! MSC2376: Disable URL Previews",
	"formatted_body": "Hey, look at what I did! <a data-mx-nopreview src=\"https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2379\">MSC2376: Disable URL Previews</a>"
}
```

## Potential issues
HTML tags are usually meant for formatting. Disabling URL previews isn't strictly formatting.
However, as the client will already have parsed the tag in order to generate a URL preview the place

> seems appropriate.

Reviewer 3: Actually, it's not quite correct. First, this approach basically requires bot writers to send HTML-formatted messages in order to disable previews. Second, clients may look at plain text message and pick URLs from there, disregarding `formatted_body` completely.

## Alternatives
A flag could be set for the entire message to disable URL previews, however that doesn't allow for
having within a message one URL with preview and one without.

## Security considerations

> You could get tricked more easily into being Rickroll'd.

Reviewer 3: This can be alleviated by encouraging clients to request previews explicitly (either by hovering or by clicking a special button next to the link).

Author: Can soru just re-use that wording for the MSC?

Reviewer 3: Of course, feel free :)

# MSC 2376: Disable URL Previews
Currently URLs posted in chat give a URL preview. Sometimes, for example with bots, this can be
unwanted. For instance if a bot is posting a message with a lot of links, or the content of the link
is already obvious from the message itself.

## Proposal
This proposal adds a new attribute to the `formatted_body` key of messages with type
`m.room.message` and msgtype `m.text`.

It adds a new attribute, `data-mx-nopreview` to the `<a>` HTML tag. If this attribute is present the

> client SHOULD NOT display a URL preview.

Reviewer 4: I think that "SHOULD NOT" is a bit too strong here, and I'd prefer if it was more of a suggestion to the client to not display a preview, as a client may want to allow the user to request a preview anyways.  Maybe something like "The presence of the attribute can be used as a hint by clients to indicate that a URL preview for the link is not necessary, and clients may skip the link when displaying previews."  (Or maybe something more compact.)

### Example
```json
{
	"msgtype": "m.text",
	"format": "org.matrix.custom.html",
	"body": "Hey, look at what I did! MSC2376: Disable URL Previews",

> 	"formatted_body": "Hey, look at what I did! <a data-mx-nopreview src=\"https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2379\">MSC2376: Disable URL Previews</a>"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	"formatted_body": "Hey, look at what I did! <a data-mx-nopreview src=\"https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2376\">MSC2376: Disable URL Previews</a>"
```
